---
layout: post
title: "Luanti 5.15.0 released!"
authors: [rubenwardy]
description: >-
  This time we have rendering performance improvements,
  dynamic shadows on Android, a Windows installer, and many small enhancements.
excerpt: >-
  Luanti 5.15 is here! This time we have rendering performance improvements,
  dynamic shadows on Android, a Windows installer, and many small enhancements.
image: /static/blog/5.15.0/cover.jpg
image_credit: >-
  Just_Visiting -
  <a href="https://content.luanti.org/packages/Just_Visiting/agent_x/">Agent X</a>
forum_topic: https://forum.luanti.org/viewtopic.php?t=32298
tags:
  - release
---

<h2 class="sr-only">Introduction</h2>

**133** Pull Requests merged | **88** Issues resolved | **242** Commits

Luanti 5.15 is here! This time, we have rendering performance improvements,
dynamic shadows on Android, a Windows installer, and many small enhancements.

You can download Luanti from [our website](https://www.luanti.org/downloads/),
check out the code on [GitHub](https://github.com/luanti-org/luanti/), or read
the [full changelog](https://docs.luanti.org/about/changelog/#5140--5150).

## Table of Contents <!-- omit in toc -->

- [Rendering Performance Improvements](#rendering-performance-improvements)
- [Dynamic Shadows on Android](#dynamic-shadows-on-android)
- [Windows Installer](#windows-installer)
- [SDL is Required](#sdl-is-required)
- [UI and Client Improvements](#ui-and-client-improvements)
- [Modding Features](#modding-features)
- [What's Next?](#whats-next)

## Rendering Performance Improvements

Luanti now uses a modern OpenGL feature to improve rendering performance. Our
users have reported up to 10 times higher FPS in some situations. The feature is
called [Array Textures](https://wikis.khronos.org/opengl/Array_Texture) and
allows Luanti to more efficiently render different parts of the map.

Your device needs to support and use OpenGL 3.2+ or OpenGL ES 3.0. You can verify
this by checking the About tab of the main menu. On desktop, it should say
"opengl3" and not "opengl" on the bottom left. On Android, it should say "ES 3 /
ogles2".

This release contains many other rendering clean-ups and improvements that
should make Luanti run better and be in a nicer state for future work.

## Dynamic Shadows on Android

Android users rejoice: dynamic shadows are now supported! Shadows have been
supported on desktop for quite a while, but needed to be heavily adjusted for
Android.

Your device will need to support OpenGL ES 3.2. The dynamic shadows setting will
be greyed out if unsupported. Once the setting is enabled, shadows will only
appear in-game if the game you're playing allows it.

Alongside shadows, Android now supports liquid lighting reflections and
translucent foliage.

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/5.15.0/android_shadows.jpg" caption="Dynamic shadows on Android" %}

## Windows Installer

We now offer a self-extracting installer as the default for Windows users. This
will make it much easier for Windows users to download and update Luanti without
having to manually move their save files across.

## SDL is Required

Luanti uses SDL, a well-maintained library for handling windows and input.
Luanti first shipped with SDL support in 5.12.0. SDL is no longer optional when
building the Luanti client.

We switched to SDL as part of our rendering and input modernization efforts.

## UI and Client Improvements

There's now an outline when focusing elements in the GUI, making it much easier
to use Luanti with a keyboard.

You can now bind multiple keys to the same action. This is helpful if you want
to bind both the left and right shift, for example.

Some settings are unavailable if another setting is disabled or if the user's
device doesn't support a feature. Rather than hiding unavailable settings, the
settings menu now shows unavailable settings greyed out.

The main menu now has an exit confirmation dialog and an optional dark theme
(Setting: "Menu theme").

{% include figure.html src="/static/blog/5.15.0/menu_dark_theme.png" caption="Main menu dark theme" %}


## Modding Features

As always, Luanti 5.15 comes with new modding and game creation features. This
includes support for animated inventory images, nested modpacks inside modpacks,
and improved alpha support in the HUD, the inventory, and the world.


## What's Next?

Take a look at the [pull request list](https://github.com/luanti-org/luanti/pulls)
to see what the community and developers are working on.

Everyone is [welcome to contribute](https://github.com/luanti-org/luanti/blob/master/.github/CONTRIBUTING.md)
to Luanti! Questions? Ideas? Feel free to
[get involved](https://www.luanti.org/get-involved/)!

<!--

Client / Audiovisuals

    Allow FXAA to be used together with FSAA or SSAA (lhofhansl)
    glTF: Models exported by Goxel are no longer falsely rejected (appgurueu)
    Fonts: update bundled fonts, add mono font shadow (sfan5)
    Main menu: The world configuration now shows world mods (cx384)
    PlayerHPChangeReason now provides more information (Wuzzy2)
    Roadmap update (Zughy)
    Fixes related to object rendering (appgurueu)

-->
